President Biden here in Israel, in Tel
Aviv,
talking about many different things.
Number one,
that he supports unequivocally Israel
after that attack
on October 7th
and talked about his long history
with supporting this country
all the way back to the 1970s,
right before the Yom Kippur War.
Talking to Golda meir,
who was the prime minister
at the time, by the way,
the timing of that and the timing of this
almost exactly the same,
the anniversary of the
Yom Kippur War,
October 7th,
when the attack happened here.
That has really changed this nation
and changed his position
as well as changed what it is
willing to do to Hamas in Gaza.
They are trying to,
as all of the Israeli
officials have said, read
all of Gaza of Hamas.
I want to bring in our Kaitlan Collins,
who is standing by and was in the room,
our David Chalian as well,
and our Clarissa Ward,
who is here also in Israel with us.
Caitlin, I'm going to go to you first.
What stood out to you
in hearing from the president?
I mean,
this was another unequivocal support
of of Israel
from the president of the United States.
Yeah, he loves telling that story there.
At the end,
it was his first time here to
Israel's 1972,
one year
before, of course,
the 1973 Yom Kippur War.
It had this lasting effect on him.
He often
talks about sitting down with Golda meir
when she was the prime minister
of Israel.
Obviously, things are very different now.
Here he is returning
as the president of the United States.
Israel is at war.
He's the first U.S.
president to visit Israel
when it is at war,
something that the prime Minister
Netanyahu noted earlier today.
But as the president came out here
today, Sara, he did make news.
He said that Israel has agreed
to an agreement
to allow humanitarian
aid into Gaza through Egypt.
That has been something
that has been a hold up for
well over a week
now, despite international talks
to create some kind of channel
to allow that aid.
And you've heard
Egyptian officials
say they have trucks
waiting at that Rafah crossing.
That is the only way
to get into Gaza, through Egypt,
waiting to get in.
But it has been held up.
They have blamed the Israelis.
The Israelis have pushed back on that.
The question, of course,
the President Biden did not
note is the timing of that,
when will that aid begin to flow
into Gaza?
But he did say there is an agreement
and he also said that the U.S.
is going to provide $100 million
in assistance to Gaza
and to the West Bank.
Those are two notable developments
coming out of here.
One thing that we did ask
President Biden at the end,
as he did, as you're right,
he expressed that solidarity
with Israel once again,
which was something
his staff previewed on the way over here,
which was tough questions.
They said he was going to have
for the prime minister.
And when you talk to officials
about what
those tough questions could be,
they referenced what's next here.
If Israel does go into Gaza,
if there is that ground invasion,
what does the timing of that look like?
What is the objective of that
and what happens after that's over?
You heard Prime Minister Netanyahu
earlier warning
that this could be a long road
to victory was the phrase that he used.
Of course, the question is how long
and what it looks like after that.
That's President Biden left the room.
He did not answer that question.
He did issue another warning, though,
about one of his main concerns.
One of the biggest things that I've heard
from officials
that I've spoken to in recent days,
which is the idea
that this could escalate into a broader
regional conflict.
And that is only something
that has become
really more illuminated
in the last 24 hours
since that hospital was hit.
I do want to note
earlier today,
the president said
he did not believe it was Israel
that was behind that explosion
at that hospital in Gaza.
He said it was someone
from the other team.
Here he clarified those remarks.
He said he believed that
based on what he has heard
and what he has seen,
that it was an errant rocket
from a Palestinian terrorist group
so that is an update there
and a clarification there
from his earlier remark
that was not very clear
to what he believes it is.
And that terrorist group
that he is referring to,
Israel says it was Islamic
Jihad, not Hamas,
but it is another group
that exists there
that does not believe
in the existence of Israel itself.
I want to go now.
Thank you, Caitlin, for that.
Stick with us.
I'm going to go now to David Chalian.
David, can you tell us about the
just the significance that during
a officially declared war,
that the president of the United States
came into this country trying to get
some humanitarian work done,
coming to just show solidarity,
but just the significance of of him
being here
as we have seen rockets
coming into this country
every single day.
And night throughout.
Meantime, there are explosions
going on in Gaza at the same time
and a huge humanitarian crisis
going on there.
What's the significance
of him being here now?
Well, Sara, you
saw the president himself highlighted
that he was the first president
to visit Israel in a time of war.
He wanted to make sure
everybody understood that it is
indeed a significant move.
And I think it was so clear
what he was doing throughout his remarks.
The whole first half,
as you and Caitlin were discussing,
was that complete
repetition of that
total solidarity with Israel
standing side by side
in total support of Israel.
And I think
when you talk to folks
around the president,
what they believe
that position does
is allow him
to go into the second
half of his remarks,
which was to call on the better angels
and the humanitarian sympathies
of the people of Israel,
and not to get to consumed
by their passions and anger in response
to the terrorist attacks,
and that they keep in mind
who they are as a people.
As he was trying to express the need
for humanitarian assistance, for
the ability for Israel to
by urging some restraint.
And I think when you
when you look at the remarks
and how they were structured,
you see a president of the United States
doing that
very thing we've been talking about,
which is threading a needle here.
Obviously, time will tell.
The future will only tell us
if that is successful.
But it's clear
that's what
the objective was in its visit
And putting a button
on the visit with these remarks.
Yeah,
diplomacy is of the utmost importance
here,
but very, very difficult to actually,
as you put it, thread that needle.
I want to go now
to Clarissa Ward,
who is here with me in Israel.
I am curious from your perspective,
after hearing what you did
about the humanitarian breakthrough.
Hopefully, although it has not happened
and Gaza by
the hour is getting more
and more desperate
for the civilians there.
What how do you think that the
Arab world,
you know, Jordan,
people in Jordan,
people who are protesting right now
in Beirut,
and the response in the West Bank,
how they're going to react
to hearing
the president's comments
from Tel Aviv today.
I think the reactions
will not be positive.
This will be seen as a full
throated endorsement
of Israel and of Israel's
comportment over the last ten days, which
obviously Arab countries have denounced.
I think there will be a lot of talk
about what wasn't said.
There was no call for restraint.
There was no call for a cease fire.
It's important
to remind viewers
that the leaders of these Arab
countries have many young people
who are now impassioned
and outraged and upset
and are taking to the streets.
And so they have to be seen
as taking a hard stance,
as supporting the Palestinian people.
They are also trying,
just like President Biden,
to thread the needle, if you will.
He did say, as you
mentioned, that
there has been some agreement
on the Israeli side
to allow the passage of aid
into Gaza with the
proviso that Hamas does not divert
that aid.
But he also said that he hoped
that would happen
as soon as possible,
with no real clarity or sense
of when that might be.
And I agree with David
that he did issue as well
some gentle warnings to Israel
after the first half of the speech,
which was all about this
remarkable display of solidarity
with Israel.
He said,
We have felt that rage after 911.
We learned from mistakes
that were made after 911.
I believe his quote was,
while you feel that rage,
don't be consumed about it.
And make sure that you have clarity
about your objectives,
that is obviously urging Israel's leaders
to think very strategically
and very clearly about what comes next.
Everybody has been waiting for
quite some time
now for this much
anticipated ground invasion.
There are very real questions,
I think, being asked by world leaders
from many different countries
about what that looks like,
what the tangible result
would be of that.
The Israelis have said
they want to essentially dismantle
and uproot Hamas once and for all.
But still, questions remain.
How do you go about doing that?
Who steps in to fill the void afterwards?
We have heard previously
President Biden
say in an interview on 60 Minutes
that he does not think
it would be a good idea
for Israel to try to rearm, occupy Gaza.
And so I think just a subtle warning
that now is also a time to
take a deep breath
and think very,
very clearly
about what the next moves might be
and what the ramifications
of those might be.
And also a very stern warning,
presumably to Iran,
to Hezbollah, to others in the region
who might be watching this moment,
he said, who might be
thinking of attacking Israel.
He said, quote, Don't, don't, don't.
Sarah.
Yeah, some incredibly
salient points from you there.
Clarissa Ward in Ashkelon,
Caitlin Collins here in Tel Aviv,
and David Chalian in Washington.
Thank you to you all.